# genomics
Using Runtime Reconfiguration to Accelerate Short Read Alignment.







Student Name: Lubna Ibrahim Hamed Ibrahim Habeb.

Doctor Name: Sara ElMetwally.

Faculty Name: Computers and Information sciences.

University Name: Mansoura University. 



Abstract : Recent advances in the throughput of next-generation sequencing machines have created a tremendous computational challenge in analysing massive amounts of sequenced data. fabricated Short is an important first step in genomic data analysis. The research workflow is slowed by read alignment, which is a bottleneck. The use of a reconfigurable architecture is investigated in this article. to speed up the process Bowtie2's seed-and-extend model was used. The proposed method integrates all available information from sequencing data into an FPGA align-ment pipeline for biologically accurate runtime acceleration. Experiments show that when compared to Bowtie2, our architecture achieves a similar alignment rate while mapping reads twice as quickly. The alignment time is decreased in particular from 50 minutes to 26 minutes when processing 300M reads.

Introduction : NGS machines are capable of generating millions of short DNA fragments from the sampled cells within hours. These fragments are produced by randomly segmenting the sampled DNA strand.The orientation and location information of the reads with respect to the original DNA is lost as a result of this action. As a result, a critical first move of Quick read alignment (mapping) is a form of genomic analysis.The NGS machine generates short reads, which are mapped to a genome that serves as a guide.For the past decade, however, NGS technology has progressed much faster than Moore's Law. Because of the time it takes to sync reads with machines, it becomes unworkable.[2] time for execution This makes it difficult to use cannabis for medicinal purposes.Prenatal diagnostics and tracking are two examples of NGS applications [3] لا, [4].where the DNA and RNA of individuals should be easily analysed for an affordable price As a result, it's important to speed things up.where the DNA and RNA of individuals can be examined easily and cheaply. As a result, short read alignment must be accelerated in order to close the distance between alignment research and implementation.as well as training.Because of its highly parallel bit-wised architecture, FPGA has shown to be a promising candidate for accelerating short read mapping [5]. As the alphabet is generated in a specific order by the NGS devices can be broken down into the letters A, C, G, T, and N. 3 bits are used to represent the DNA nucleotides.to the reference genome is a bitwise operation by definition.Different algorithms have been implemented and accelerated on FPGA, such as the FM-index [6] and Smith-Waterman [7], because they are commonly used in popular software such as Bowtie2 [8] and BWA-MEM [9] are two examples.Despite its success, FPGA-accelerated alignment is still a work in progress.In genomic research and clinical applications, it is rarely used.There are two reasons for this: • The majority of accelerators have failed to make full use of the information available in NGS data. For the sake of hardware simplicity,They only use the Watson-Crick alphabets A, G, C, and T.ignoring the quality metric data and ambiguous characters (N characters) that are frequently found in NGS information.This can lead to incorrect alignment and biologically invalid results, which can be disastrous for applications like prenatal diagnostics and monitoring.Many FPGA researchers choose and accelerate alignment algorithms that favour hardware implementations. As a result, the alignment workflow may be inconsistent with cutting-edge software. For example, Arram et al. [10] propose an FPGA aligner that performs exact string matching (ESM) based on the FM-index, followed by approximate string matching (ASM) based on the seed-and-extend model. Only unmapped reads are routed to the ASM for processing in order to improve hardware performance. This methodology, on the other hand, is incompatible with the alignment model.BWA [11], Bowtie [12], and others are examples of popular software.Bowtie2, limiting biological validity and Reproducibility of hardware-generated alignment outputs.To improve the utility of short read mapping accelerators in real-world applications, we propose a two-stage alignment architecture similar to the seed-and-extend model. Bowtie2 We decouple the seeding and extension stages into two separate FPGA configurations using the runtime reconfigurability of FPGA to achieve a balanced,The alignment pipeline has been completely optimised. Finally, we take into account complete NGS data in its entirety, including quality metrics (Phred quality) in additionduring the alignment, ambiguous characters (N characters) toruntime to ensure precision.The following are the main contributions of this work: • A novel alignment architecture consisting of a two-stage configuration alignment pipeline.It takes advantage of FPGA reconfigurability to achieve highly efficient implementation for each configuration as well as a fully optimised alignment pipeline.A hardware implementation of the reconfigurable architecture aimed at a single FPGA. The seeding stage is based on FM-index implementation, and the extension stage is based on a Smith-Waterman implementation with affine-gap model.An assessment of the optimal hardware architecture based on the target platform Xilinx VU9P, with comparisons to the cutting-edge software Bowtie2 on multi-core processors and some existing FPGA solutions.

Background :Two-stage architecture: the FM-index and Smith-Waterman model. The seed-and-extend model, which is essentially the accelerator of our accelerator, is also used.To generate the FM-index, we need to extend the R and extend R and the T(R) to form two functions: i(x) and c(n, x) For each character x, i(X) is the number of characters in R that is lexicographically smaller than x. The CACGT is the BWT of an example reference genome R = CACG.Seed-and-Extend Model — Smith-Waterman provides an optimal alignment for alignment with an optimal match/mismatch, insertion and deletion. Time complexity is prohibitively expensive given the reference is three billion base pair (bp). 

Related work : Comprehensive surveys regarding the FPGA acceleration of short read alignment are provided in [2], [14]. Many existing accelerators are based on the suffix-trie method, Smith-Water man algorithm, or both. Recently, Fei et al. propose FPGASW that accelerates the Smith- waterman algorithm with affine gap model for read mapping.The complete NGS data undoubtedly complicatesthe FPGA implementation. Some researchers work around this problem by proposing a software and hardware co-design based on the defacto software framework. However, these designs still suffer from the software bottleneck and communication overhead, unless the implementation is based on a multi-FPGA platform.This paper presents an alignment pipeline that is similar to the algorithmic workflow of Bowtie2. With the consideration of quality metrics and N characters, these previous works accelerate the Smith-Waterman algorithm with affine-gap model. However, they only provide a sub-optimal speed-up since seeding still relies on the processor.

Methodology:The accelerator architecture is based on a similar approach to Bowtie2. It uses the seed-and-extend model where seed locations are calculated using the FM-index. Different techniques such as SIMD can be applied to each stage so as to fully utilize the modern CPU hardware.
In the various efforts that accelerate alignment with FPGA, the target device is static configured with a circuit. A mod-ule within a circuit that implements a specific algorithm is tightly interlinked with other modules, forming a complete alignment workflow. This can be difficult and even impossible due to limited resources available on FPG aegis. In Bowtie2, a read is only processed by the extension referenced subroutine if the seeds can be identified and exactly aligned to the reference.This section discusses the FPGA implementations of the two-stage alignment pipeline. The techniques used to improve the alignment performance are also discussed. For a static configured design, we have limited control over these parameters.The seeding process begins with streaming the reads from the onboard memory. Each seed is exactly aligned to the reference index. The seed is then seeded for every 10 nucleotides in each read. Only a small portion of the reads contains N characters, which are not transferred to the FPGA. The seeding on the processor can be overlapped by the execution of FPG a.

The implementation of FM-index features the followingoptimizations to improve the alignment efficiency:. The seeds with a smaller SA range are given higher priority in the extension stage of the seed-extracting process.Fig. 1: Simplified top-level diagram for (a) the FM-index circuit. (b) the Smith-Watermanim implementation for the seeding stage. (c) The packed BWT can be recalculated on-the-fly to increase readability. (d) The required memory storage is significantly reduced to: Sampled c(n, x) Size + Packed BW T Size + T Size.Figure 1b displays the top-level architecture of the Smith-Waterman implementation. It is composed of three major parts: a matrix, a pipeline and a design. The matrix consists of a pipeline of cells where each one computes one score for the cells are one score. The reference extracted in the proximity of the position is shifted through the array. The second part, we use block RAM to create a matrix in order to store up every score.
Consideration of all NGS Data — A major component of this article is the capability of recognizing the complete NGS data. One important information is the Phred quality [24], a metric that is usually called a "best" quality. The entire operation is highly computationally intensive and is therefore bound by the matrix.
Resualt: In this section, we evaluate the alignment pipeline on Max-proneeler's MAX5C DFE provided by Maxeler Technologies [25]. The MAX5 C DFE is equipped with Xilinx Virtex UltraScale+ scalable VU9P and three DIMMs of 16 GB onboard DRAM. The FPGA runs at 200MHz while the host runs with Intel Xeon CPU E5-2643 and 64 GB DDR4-2400. We use ART sequencing to simulate the Human Genome. We vary the size of the read dataset. We ran the simulated dataset upon the proposed architecture and also Bowtie2 to the Bowtie.2 to achieve a more optimized and balanced and balanced architecture. We use the command: GB RAM - 192 -x grch38 -p 8 -L -p 10 -R -S 0 -S out. We run the simulated.

dataset on the proposed. architecture.Future work includes further analysis on Bowtie2 so as toemploy the same heuristic on FPGA for added acceleration. Table II presents the performance comparison be-tween the proposed architecture and previous accelerators from recent years. We select the works that are mostly based on predominantly based on the Smith-Waterman algorithm, or both for both for the FM-index or both. Table IV indicates the total resource usage for an adequate area for each implementation on Xilinx VU9P. The number of total number of seeds that hits the number of. seeds that are considered to have repetitive seeds.The number of DIMMs determines the number of computational kernels in hardware. The Smith-Waterman implementation, however, consumes almost half of the available resources.A novel, two-stage reconfigurable architecture is proposed to accelerate the seed-and-extend model, similar to the onesin Bowtie2. The proposed alignment pipeline can achieve a comparable align-aciouslyment rate and exhibit around 2 times speedup versus Bow tie2.

